.TH VWH 1 "2026-06-29" "VWH 4.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
vwh \- create, sign, seal, and verify Victor Was Here artifacts
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vwh
.I COMMAND
.RI [ ARGS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B vwh
is a single command-line tool for the VWH (Victor Was Here) artifact system. It
serves two roles from one binary:
.IP \(bu 2
.B Inspecting
\(en verifying artifacts. Requires no keys.
.IP \(bu
.B Authoring
\(en creating, signing, sealing, and publishing artifacts. Requires a keystore
under
.IR ~/.vwh .
.PP
Cryptographic verification (Ed25519 signatures and BLAKE3 note hashing) is always
local and offline-capable. A network registry is optional and advisory.
.PP
Prior to 4.0, authoring lived in a separate, unpublished
.B vwh-author
binary; the two are now unified.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS Inspecting
.TP
.B inspect \fIFILE\fR \fR[\fB\-\-offline\fR] [\fB\-\-registry \fIURL\fR]
Parse and verify a .vwh artifact: author signature, seal signature (if sealed),
note hash, and (unless offline) registry/key/ledger status.
.TP
.B note \fIFILE\fR
Display the artifact's attached note after verifying its BLAKE3 hash. Any header
block (e.g.
.IR registry: )
is parsed out; only the body is shown.
.SS Authoring
.TP
.B key init \fR[\fINAME\fR] [\fB\-\-type \fIsigning|sealing\fR] [\fB\-\-label \fILABEL\fR]
Generate a new Ed25519 identity. The private key is encrypted (Argon2id +
ChaCha20-Poly1305) and stored under
.IR ~/.vwh/keys/ .
.TP
.B key show \fR[\fINAME\fR]
Display a key's public key and fingerprint.
.TP
.B key rotate
Generate a new key and mark the current one deprecated.
.TP
.B create \fR[\fB\-\-intent \fIINTENT\fR] [\fB\-\-output \fIFILE\fR] [\fB\-\-v1\fR]
Create an unsigned draft. V2 (default) also writes a
.IB FILE .note
sidecar carrying a
.I registry:
header plus your note body.
.TP
.B sign \fIFILE\fR \fR[\fB\-\-key \fINAME\fR]
Author-sign a draft with a signing key.
.TP
.B seal \fIFILE\fR \fR[\fB\-\-key \fINAME\fR]
Dual-sign a signed artifact with a sealing key, making it immutable.
.TP
.B unseal \fIFILE\fR
Remove a V2 seal, returning the artifact to the Signed state.
.TP
.B unsign \fIFILE\fR
Strip the author signature, returning the artifact to a keyless Draft.
.TP
.B edit \fIFILE\fR \fR[\fB\-\-intent \fIINTENT\fR]
Edit draft metadata.
.TP
.B revoke key \fB\-\-reason \fIREASON\fR
Revoke a signing or sealing key in the local registry.
.TP
.B revoke artifact \fIID\fB \-\-reason \fIREASON\fR
Revoke an artifact in the ledger.
.TP
.B dump \fIkeys|ledger\fR
Print local registry state as JSON.
.TP
.B push
Publish the local registry to the remote git repository (GPG-signed commit).
.SS Planned (4.x)
.B init\fR,
.B config\fR,
.B rebase\fR,
.B export\fR,
.B restore
are present in the CLI and currently report "not yet implemented."
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-offline
(\fBinspect\fR) Skip the network registry check; perform only local
cryptographic verification.
.TP
.BR \-\-registry " " \fIURL\fR
(\fBinspect\fR) Override the registry base URL. Takes precedence over the
registry declared in the artifact's note and over the built-in default. The
registry must provide \fIURL\fR/v2/keys.json and \fIURL\fR/v2/ledger.json.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B VWH_REGISTRY_URL
On
.BR inspect ,
an override equivalent to
.BR \-\-registry .
On
.BR create ,
the value stamped into the new artifact's
.I registry:
note header. Default: https://notvc.to/vwh-registry
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.vwh/keys/<name>/
Per-key directory: identity.key.enc, identity.pub, metadata.json
.TP
.I ~/.vwh/keys.json
Local key registry
.TP
.I ~/.vwh/ledger.json
Local artifact ledger
.TP
.I ~/.vwh/registry/
Git clone of the published registry
.PP
On first run, an existing
.I ~/.config/vwh-author
keystore is copied into
.I ~/.vwh
(non-destructive).
.SH ARTIFACT STATES
.TP
.B DRAFT
Intent recorded, no author signature yet.
.TP
.B SIGNED
Author signature present, not sealed. Can be unsealed/unsigned by the author.
.TP
.B SEALED
Author + seal signatures present. Immutable.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Artifact verified (all signatures valid, key not revoked); or command succeeded.
.TP
.B 1
Fatal error (I/O, argument parsing, internal error).
.TP
.B 2
Cryptographic failure (invalid signature, revoked key, tampered content).
.TP
.B 3
Registry unavailable, but cryptographic verification passed.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B Verify an artifact offline:
.nf
vwh inspect artifact.vwh --offline
.fi
.TP
.B Author, sign, and seal:
.nf
vwh key init --type signing
vwh key init --type sealing
vwh create --intent lab
vwh sign artifact.vwh
vwh seal artifact.vwh
.fi
.TP
.B Publish to your own registry:
.nf
export VWH_REGISTRY_URL=https://example.com/vwh-registry
vwh create --intent research
.fi
.SH TRUST MODEL
Local Ed25519 signature verification and BLAKE3 note hashing are authoritative
and cannot be overridden by registry data. Registry key status and artifact
acknowledgment are advisory; registry failure never invalidates a valid
signature.
.SH SEE ALSO
Full documentation, specification, and the "Frame Me" challenge:
.I https://github.com/notvcto/vwh
.SH AUTHOR
Victor Enrique Soto <contact@notvc.to>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026. MIT License.
